---
layout: post
title: "Jekyll: Blogging like a hacker"
tags:
  - jekyll
  - blogging
---
I wrote [the first post](/2005/05/26/PS3-and-parallell-programming/) on this
site in 2005 using [Serendipity](http://www.s9y.org). While Serendipity
is a completely adequate blogging engine, I have been annoyed by a few things.
All of them would apply to any popular blogging engine, which is why I
wanted something different. I have now found a tool that takes
a very different approach.

Before I go into that, let's list the things that didn't feel right with a
"classical" blogging engine:

1. Serendipity is written in PHP. This is good since there are plenty of ISPs
that can host PHP sites. Unfortunately I'm no PHP hacker myself, so it is not
easy for me to change the internal workings of the site.

2. I have more interesting things to do than keeping up with the latest versions
of the software. It is especially worrying if I don't have the time to install
security patches. This would apply no matter what blogging engine i chose. As
long as there is server-side code, there is a risk of security holes.

3. I'm a programmer. I'm used to working with text files. I can manipulate them
with tools for version control, utilities like grep and sed, programming
languages like Python and Ruby and any text editor of my liking. Entering text
into a form on a web page may be easier for a non-programmer, but I have other
usability requirements. (Also, with a web form text can easily get lost. I've
been [saved by tcpdump](/2008/12/02/Saved-by-tcpdump/) more than once.)

